# Rocket v0.4 Release Candidate

<p class="metadata"><strong>
  Posted by <a href="https://sergio.bz">Sergio Benitez</a> on October 31, 2018
</strong></p>

I am delighted to announce that a release candidate for Rocket v0.4 is available
today! This release brings over a year of features, improvements, and
refinements, resolving some of the most called for requests and bringing Rocket
measurably closer to stable compatibility.

The release candidate is an opportunity to discover issues with Rocket v0.4 and
its documentation before its general release. We encourage all users to migrate
their applications to the release candidate and report any issues to the [GitHub
issue tracker].

Barring any major issues, the general release of Rocket v0.4 is planned for
Friday, November 9th, when we'll post a full news article covering the biggest
features and changes in Rocket v0.4. Until then, the [CHANGELOG] contains every
feature addition, change, and improvement since v0.3, as well as information on
migrating your applications to v0.4. All documentation, including the [guide]
and [API docs], has been updated in full for v0.4.

We're excited for your feedback, and we look forward to seeing you again on
Friday, November 9th for the general release!

[GitHub issue tracker]: https://github.com/SergioBenitez/Rocket/issues
[API docs]: https://api.rocket.rs/v0.4/rocket/
[guide]: @guide-v0.4
[CHANGELOG]: https://github.com/SergioBenitez/Rocket/tree/v0.4/CHANGELOG.md#version-040-rc-oct-31-2018

## About Rocket

Rocket is a web framework for Rust with a focus on ease of use, expressibility,
and speed. Rocket makes it simple to write fast web applications without
sacrificing flexibility or type safety. All with minimal code.

Not already using Rocket? Join the tens of thousands of users and hundreds of
companies happily using Rocket today! Rocket's extensive documentation makes it
easy. Get started now by [reading through the guide](@guide-v0.4) or learning
more from [the overview](../../overview).
