# Rocket's 2nd v0.4 Release Candidate

<p class="metadata"><strong>
  Posted by <a href="https://sergio.bz">Sergio Benitez</a> on November 30, 2018
</strong></p>

After a successful and productive initial v0.4 release candidate, I am happy to
announce that the second release candidate for Rocket v0.4 is now available.

This release candidate fixes issues identified during the first release
candidate, introduces further features, and leverages upstream `rustc`
contributions for improved diagnostics and stability. As before, this is an
opportunity to discover issues with Rocket v0.4 and its documentation before its
general release. We encourage all users to migrate their applications to the
second release candidate and report any issues to the [GitHub issue tracker].
To update to `v0.4.0`, manually update `rocket` in your `Cargo.toml` file:

```toml
[dependencies]
rocket = "0.4.0"
```

Barring any major issues, of which none are expected, the general release of
Rocket v0.4 is planned for Wednesday, December 5th, when we'll post a full news
article covering the biggest features and changes in Rocket v0.4. Until then,
the [CHANGELOG] contains every feature addition, change, and improvement since
v0.4.0-rc.1 and v0.3, as well as information on migrating your applications to
v0.4. All documentation, including the [guide] and [API docs], has been updated
in full for the second release candidate.

We're excited for your feedback, and we look forward to seeing you again on
Wednesday, December 5th for the general release!

[GitHub issue tracker]: https://github.com/SergioBenitez/Rocket/issues
[API docs]: @api-v0.4
[guide]: @guide-v0.4
[CHANGELOG]: https://github.com/SergioBenitez/Rocket/tree/v0.4/CHANGELOG.md#version-040-rc2-nov-30-2018

## About Rocket

Rocket is a web framework for Rust with a focus on ease of use, expressibility,
and speed. Rocket makes it simple to write fast web applications without
sacrificing flexibility or type safety. All with minimal code.

Not already using Rocket? Join the tens of thousands of users and hundreds of
companies happily using Rocket today! Rocket's extensive documentation makes it
easy. Get started now by [reading through the guide](@guide-v0.4) or learning
more from [the overview](../../overview).
